\chapter{Acknowledgments}

This thesis concludes almost four years of work at the University of
Alberta and could not have been written without the help and support of my
mentors, coworkers, friends, and family.

I would like to thank my colleague and office mate Christopher Polachic for
tirelessly enduring my monologues on quantum-dot cellular automata, bouncing off
my ideas, and giving valuable feedback. Thanks to him I am equipped with a
better understanding of the dynamic mean field theory and the dynamic Hubbard
model, and everything from Canadian childcare to Quebec's separation efforts to
sensible stock investments.  My coworker Jin Xu has taught me about most things
between spin systems and job hunting, and has always been there for some deeper
insights into Chinese culture. I would like to thank him. I am indebted to
Roshan Achal for distractful office lunch breaks and a fun year with the
graduate physics student association. I extend my gratitude to Carl Chandler for
writing a small software library together and for tolerating my snoring in
Denver. I owe a great trip to Boston and New York, a missed flight, and an
awesome time in Dresden to Fabian Zschocke, with whom I shared the office for
one year.

Marco Taucer and the whole group of Robert Wolkow have provided valuable
comments on my ideas and calculations, and patiently explained dangling
bonds on silicon and their understanding of and vision for quantum-dot cellular
automata. Their experiments really originally inspired my research and I am
greatly thankful for their work and feedback.

I would like to note the advise and support I have received from my supervisory
committee members, Mark Freeman, Massimo Bnonsegni, and Frank Marsiglio. I am
very grateful for them accepting and working with my tight deadlines. Special
thanks go to my supervisor Kevin Beach. He has provided guidance and help over
the years, and an all-in-all very comfortable and enjoyable environment. It has
been a pleasure to work with him. I am also grateful for my previous supervisor
Fakher Assaad for suggesting to work with Kevin Beach and move to Edmonton, the
nice city with the underwhelming reputation in the middle of nowhere in western
Canada, in the first place. I thank Alberta Innovates - Technology Futures for
paying my living for the last two years. I am grateful for Kevin's NSERC
Discovery grant for covering travelling and other expenses.

I particularly want to thank my girlfriend Esly Alvarez for encouraging me to
keep going, convincing me that this thesis can actually be completed, and for
accepting me working odd hours through the night. I thank her for always being
there and moving around half the world with me.
